# Bayesian time-series analyses of Classic Maya conflict
### This repo contains the R code used for the study presented in the following paper:

[*Carleton, Campbell, and Collard (submitted) "Bayesian time-series analyses reveal a complex impact of climate change on Classic Maya conflict"*]()

## Abstract
Researchers disagree about the impact of climate change on conflict among the Maya during the Classic period (ca. 250-900 CE). Some contend that increasing aridity exacerbated conflict, while others have found that increasing temperature ramped up conflict. Here, we report a study in which we sought to resolve this disagreement. We collated annually-resolved conflict and climate data, and then created a Bayesian time-series model for analysing count-based prehistoric and historic data. We carried out three analyses, one covering more or less the whole of the Classic Period (292-900 CE), one focused on the Early Classic (292-600 CE), and one that concentrated on the Late Classic (600-900 CE). Our analyses indicated that climate change likely did impact Classic Maya conflict levels, but our results differed from those of previous studies in two important ways. First, we found that the impact of climate change is only evident during the Late Classic. Second, we found that while increasing summer temperature exacerbated conflict, increasing aridity suppressed it. Thus, our study offers a new, more complex perspective on Classic Maya climate-conflict dynamics. It also has implications for our understanding of other aspects of Classic Maya history and for the debate about the likely impact of the current bout of climate change on conflict levels.

## Software
The R scripts provide in this repo require [*Nimble*](https://r-nimble.org/), a new R package for writing Bayesian statistical models in the BUGS language from R. You will need to install that package in order to run the scripts. You will also need the data we used in the paper if you plan to replicate our findings. In order to request access to the data, please contact the corresponding author, [*Prof. Mark Collard*](http://profmarkcollard.com/).

## Time Series Model
For those who are interested, the Bayesian time series model we developed has wide applicability to autocorrelated Poisson processes where there is a structural bias in the data due to exposure. In our case, the bias comes from the fact that the conflict record we analysed was based on the Classic Maya epigraphic record. The epigraphic record comprises historical events inscribed on monuments. So, changes in the number of monuments undoubtedly affects the patterns in the number of conflicts---i.e., there is an exposure effect that needs to be accounted for. A similar exposure effect would exist in any quantitative analysis of archaeological and/or historical count-based time-series data because archaeological and historical data are generally derived from contexts that can be biased by a number of potential effects. For instance, the number of archaeological contexts[1] observed could be affected by taphonomy or research intensity in a given region, which means that a count-based record of artifacts found in those contexts will be biased by taphonomic processes and/or sampling respectively. Similarly, count-based (documentary) historical records are derived from documents, which means that the number of documents available or the way in which those documents are counted could affect the count-based record of interest. To account for this sort of exposure bias, we included a time-indexed exposure term in the model. So, the model can be interpreted as estimating the outcome process per unit of exposure---in our case, the model is estimating the effect of covariates on the number conflicts dated to a given year per monument dated to the same year. The model we created, and the R-Nimble code we developed, could be applied to any archaeological or historical Poisson time-series regression in which there is an exposure effect. 

#### Footnotes
1. In short, a "context" in the archaeological sense refers to a unit of excavation or analysis sometimes defined by an individual stratigraphic/depositional event---e.g., a settlement could be a context, so could a single hearth, or a single burial. Artifacts and material found in a given context are considered to be "associated". In Poisson regression terms, the context is also the "exposure".
